# [Day 17: Spinlock](https://adventofcode.com/2017/day/17)

## Part 1

Suddenly, whirling in the distance, you notice what looks like a massive, pixelated hurricane: a deadly spinlock. This spinlock isn't just consuming computing power, but memory, too; vast, digital mountains are being ripped from the ground and consumed by the vortex.

If you don't move quickly, fixing that printer will be the least of your problems.

This spinlock's algorithm is simple but efficient, quickly consuming everything in its path. It starts with a circular buffer containing only the value 0, which it marks as the current position. It then steps forward through the circular buffer some number of steps (your puzzle input) before inserting the first new value, 1, after the value it stopped on. The inserted value becomes the current position. Then, it steps forward from there the same number of steps, and wherever it stops, inserts after it the second new value, 2, and uses that as the new current position again.

It repeats this process of stepping forward, inserting a new value, and using the location of the inserted value as the new current position a total of 2017 times, inserting 2017 as its final operation, and ending with a total of 2018 values (including 0) in the circular buffer.

For example, if the spinlock were to step 3 times per insert, the circular buffer would begin to evolve like this (using parentheses to mark the current position after each iteration of the algorithm):

- `(0)`, the initial state before any insertions.
- `0 (1)`: the spinlock steps forward three times (0, 0, 0), and then inserts the first value, 1, after it. 1 becomes the current position.
- `0 (2) 1`: the spinlock steps forward three times (0, 1, 0), and then inserts the second value, 2, after it. 2 becomes the current position.
- `0  2 (3) 1`: the spinlock steps forward three times (1, 0, 2), and then inserts the third value, 3, after it. 3 becomes the current position.

And so on:

- `0  2 (4) 3  1`
- `0 (5) 2  4  3  1`
- `0  5  2  4  3 (6) 1`
- `0  5 (7) 2  4  3  6  1`
- `0  5  7  2  4  3 (8) 6  1`
- `0 (9) 5  7  2  4  3  8  6  1`

Eventually, after 2017 insertions, the section of the circular buffer near the last insertion looks like this:

```
1512  1134  151 (2017) 638  1513  851
```

Perhaps, if you can identify the value that will ultimately be after the last value written (2017), you can short-circuit the spinlock. In this example, that would be 638.

What is the value after 2017 in your completed circular buffer?

### Solved

Let's fill in an array while "rotating" its next element around by offset. For any N, the actual index of the next element is N modulo length of the array plus current position in the array:

```clojure
(defn idxoff [i o l]
  (mod (+ i o 1) l))

(defn rot-right-array [n o]
  (loop [i 2
         r '(0 1)
         c 1]
    (if (= i n)
      r
      (recur (inc i)
             (concat (take (idxoff c o (count r)) r)
                     (list i)
                     (drop (idxoff c o (count r)) r))
             (idxoff c o (count r))))))
```

The calculation is therefore a matter of getting the sequence of 2018 items (from 0 up to 2017), drop all the elements before 2017 and take the one that follows it:

```clojure
(defn calculate [input]
  (->> input
       (rot-right-array 2018)
       (drop-while #(not= 2017 %))
       second))
```

## Part 2

The spinlock does not short-circuit. Instead, it gets more angry. At least, you assume that's what happened; it's spinning significantly faster than it was a moment ago.

You have good news and bad news.

The good news is that you have improved calculations for how to stop the spinlock. They indicate that you actually need to identify the value after 0 in the current state of the circular buffer.

The bad news is that while you were determining this, the spinlock has just finished inserting its fifty millionth value (50000000).

What is the value after 0 the moment 50000000 is inserted?

### Solved

Now this is some sort of crazy stuff.

The thing is that we don't need to generate the whole sequence. It's therefore possible to fit into O(1) in space complexity. All we need is to maintain the index of "0" in the imaginary array. Putting items in our imaginary array would not effect in the actual sequence being updated, but instead in the "index" of "0": if the new index is below current index, do nothing; if it's above current index by 1, we potentially have the target value; if above by more than 1, ignore it.

Getting index of the next element is similar to what we did in Part 1 to get the next index of an element:

```clojure
(defn get-next [c o i]
  (inc (mod (+ c o) i)))
```

Let's make a range and reduce it:

```clojure
(defn calculate2 [input times]
  (let [r (range 1 (inc times))]
    (reduce (fn [t c]
              [(get-next (first t) input c)
               (if (= (get-next (first t) input c) 1)
                 c
                 (second t))])
            [0 0]
            r)))
```

It returns the right answer, but actually a bit slow. A simple loop/recur would yield the right result faster:

```clojure
(defn calculate3 [input times]
  (loop [i 1
         current 0
         target 0]
    (if (= i times)
      target
      (recur (inc i)
             (get-next current input i)
             (if (= (get-next current input i) 1)
               i
               target)))))
```

(2x faster)
