# [Day 3: Spiral Memory](http://adventofcode.com/2017/day/3)

## Part 1

The day 3, part 1 description:

You come across an experimental new kind of memory stored on an infinite two-dimensional grid.

Each square on the grid is allocated in a spiral pattern starting at a location marked 1 and then counting up while spiraling outward. For example, the first few squares are allocated like this:

```
17  16  15  14  13
18   5   4   3  12
19   6   1   2  11
20   7   8   9  10
21  22  23---> ...
```

While this is very space-efficient (no squares are skipped), requested data must be carried back to square 1 (the location of the only access port for this memory system) by programs that can only move up, down, left, or right. They always take the shortest path: the Manhattan Distance between the location of the data and square 1.

For example:

- Data from square 1 is carried 0 steps, since it's at the access port.
- Data from square 12 is carried 3 steps, such as: down, left, left.
- Data from square 23 is carried only 2 steps: up twice.
- Data from square 1024 must be carried 31 steps.

How many steps are required to carry the data from the square identified in your puzzle input all the way to the access port?

### Solved

The solution of this problem is purely arithmetic. There's no need to construct a spiral two-dimensional data structure or anyhow maintain the list. It takes just a few operations:

- find the nearest square root that is uneven, the _base_,
- "transpose" the fragment of an imaginary spiral at most 3 times, such that it's closest to the _base_ but not less than it,
- find the _vertical center_,
- the answer is the number of steps from "transposed" number and _vertical center_ plus canonical number of steps for the _base_.

Like this:

```clojure
(defn base [x]
  (int (Math/floor (Math/sqrt x))))

(defn find-closest-base [x]
  (let [sqrt-x (base x)
        biggest-base (if (odd? sqrt-x) sqrt-x (dec sqrt-x))]
    biggest-base))

(defn find-least-transposed-number [b x]
  (if (> (- x b) (* b b))
    (find-least-transposed-number b (- x b 1))
    x))

(defn get-canonical-length [b]
  (/ (- b 1) 2))

(defn find-spiral-vertical-center [b]
  (+ (* b b)
     (/ (+ b 1) 2)))

(defn get-vertical-steps [vertical-center least-transposed-x]
  (Math/abs (- vertical-center least-transposed-x)))

(defn calculate [x]
  (let [b (find-closest-base x)
        least-transposed-x (find-least-transposed-number b x)
        vertical-center (find-spiral-vertical-center b)
        vertical-steps (get-vertical-steps vertical-center least-transposed-x)
        horizontal-steps (inc (get-canonical-length b))]
    (+ vertical-steps horizontal-steps)))
```
