# [Day 4: High-Entropy Passphrases](http://adventofcode.com/2017/day/4)

## Part 1

A new system policy has been put in place that requires all accounts to use a passphrase instead of simply a password. A passphrase consists of a series of words (lowercase letters) separated by spaces.

To ensure security, a valid passphrase must contain no duplicate words.

For example:

- aa bb cc dd ee is valid.
- aa bb cc dd aa is not valid - the word aa appears more than once.
- aa bb cc dd aaa is valid - aa and aaa count as different words.

The system's full passphrase list is available as your puzzle input. How many passphrases are valid?

## Solved

```clojure
(defn validate [s]
  (let [strs (clojure.string/split s #"\s+")
        duplicates (filter (fn [[k v]] (> v 1)) (frequencies strs))]
    (empty? duplicates)))

(defn calculate [s]
  (let [lines (clojure.string/split s #"\n")
        n (filter #(true? %) (map validate lines))]
    (count n)))
```

## Part 2

For added security, yet another system policy has been put in place. Now, a valid passphrase must contain no two words that are anagrams of each other - that is, a passphrase is invalid if any word's letters can be rearranged to form any other word in the passphrase.

For example:

- abcde fghij is a valid passphrase.
- abcde xyz ecdab is not valid - the letters from the third word can be rearranged to form the first word.
- a ab abc abd abf abj is a valid passphrase, because all letters need to be used when forming another - word.
- iiii oiii ooii oooi oooo is valid.
- oiii ioii iioi iiio is not valid - any of these words can be rearranged to form any other word.

Under this new system policy, how many passphrases are valid?

## Solved

Instead of strings, take sorted seqs of chars (named "norms", normalized strings):

```clojure
(defn validate [s]
  (let [strs (clojure.string/split s #"\s+")
        norms (map sort strs)
        duplicates (filter (fn [[k v]] (> v 1)) (frequencies norms))]
    (empty? duplicates)))

(defn calculate [s]
  (let [lines (clojure.string/split s #"\n")
        n (filter #(true? %) (map validate lines))]
    (count n)))
```
